# Tails Wagging Dogs - and the Law

> As frustrated as I am about the dogs - I'm more annoyed that in this edition
> of Being Bayesian, there are no stats, charts, or data. Without data, all you
> can do is rant.

Cookie was only months old when she broke free for the first time.

I was walking her in the lane behind my house when she saw something, probably a
cat. With one tight jerk, she lunged, the collar snapped and she disappeared. I
ran after her, but even as a puppy with legs barely six inches long, she was
disproportionately faster. Even today, she can be caught only if she wants to be
caught. I asked bystanders if they saw her. They pointed in the direction of my
house. She's smart, I thought, she can find her way home. Then I heard distant
barks - from at least two other dogs. I haven't run faster in my life.

What I saw on my doorstep is seared in my mind.

There was a large bale of black and brown fur. My brain took a moment to resolve
it into three huge dogs.

These three monstrously large[^1] dogs had their backs to me, hackles raised and
backs arched, all growling menacingly. One of them was Bobo, who we have
otherwise loved as our own - but in that moment I wanted to kill him.  Another
was a very old dog who used to frequent the service lane behind my house. I
never saw him again. And the third dog was the resident stray of the next lane.
I've always very uncharitably called him the "asshole dog" because he stealthily
attacked Cookie once later too.

Not one of them moved, nor made the slightest change in their stances as I
stomped towards them, making every effort to stomp as loudly as possible.

And then I saw her over their shoulders.

She was on her hind legs, almost standing erect on them, her back glued to my
front door. She was snarling with teeth bared, completely cornered and
desperate. Her pursuers had had her to themselves for at least a minute before I
showed up - and in that minute, they could have torn her apart. 

Even when she was standing erect, she was just about a foot tall. But there was
an indignation, an anger in all six kilos of her. I can’t imagine something
barely larger than a football having so much ferocity and menace. I could not be
more proud. After some frantic shouting and stomping, I managed to shoo the dogs
off. Cookie had held her ground honourably.

But since then, Cookie has hated stray dogs with a vengeance. She can easily
pass off as an RWA uncle. She would even make an excellent _amicus curiae_ in
the Supreme Court's quest for a Delhi free of strays.

---

![](assets/bobo-before-cookie.jpg)

Cookie has a very different relationship with Bobo now. Over the years they have
been playmates, enemies and friends. Now, as age catches up with Bobo, they are
simply tolerant of each other. I saw Cookie's anger fade away gradually, as she
started regarding Bobo with curiosity - sometimes cautious and sometimes
playful.

![](assets/bobo-cookie-1.jpg)

The more I think of it, the more I realize that that's exactly how I write
editions of _Being Bayesian_[^2]. My first draft is, without exception, an angry
rant at something outrageous. It's never published. I just let it cook and
gestate for a few weeks. Then, when the anger has faded away and I've developed
a healthy degree of detachment from the original draft - I go to work. It also
helps that I'm a better editor than a writer.

After the anger and indignation have evaporated, all that's left is curiosity -
cautions and playful. I have no choice except to be level-headed. This is the
right time to look for solid, reliable data which could illuminate whatever it
is that I was earlier mad about. The analysis which follows often breaks my own
biases (called "priors" in Bayesian inference) - and if I'm lucky, it helps me
make my point about how some arbitrary opinion was laughable.

Unfortunately, I have not been able to follow my process in this instance. I
can't let my rant sit for weeks, because honestly, there's a lot which I want to
get off my chest. I tried very hard looking for reasonably reliable data, but
such data as there is, is mired in contradictions. In fact, unlike my other
posts, there are no charts in this one. I'll make do with pictures of dogs,
instead.

Substituting images, feelings and memory for evidence is precisely the sort of
thing that would otherwise send me flying off the handle. But the recent order
about the stray dog menace from the Hon'ble Supreme Court has displayed such a
stunning disregard for rationality and the scientific method, that by rambling
on as I am now, I hope to even ingratiate myself with the bench.

Here, in a nutshell, is what they want:

Catch, sterilize, vaccinate and permanently impound the nearly one million stray
dogs in Delhi NCR within eight weeks.

That was, at least, the impression they gave in their oral observations on the
11th of August. After the following outrage, when the official order was
released, some of the most blatantly impractical aspects were rethought. For
example, they talk of first building capacity for 5000 dogs and then expanding
progressively. Starting with 5000 dogs and covering up to potentially a million
dogs is a tall order, and not only because of the thousand-to-million
order-of-magnitude difference.

Since there's no other reliable data, let us constrain ourselves to look at only
at these two numbers: 5000 and 1 million. As you'll see, that alone is baffling
enough. Nobody knows where either of those numbers came from. Apparently, nobody
knows much at all about the size of the problem, as Vignesh Radhakrishnan of the
Hindu says here:

![](https://youtu.be/zt9w_Dsm6l4)

So what makes the court think that 5000 is a good number to start with? For one,
The MCD has only 20 animal birth control centers in Delhi, most of which are run
in partnerships with NGOs. They can barely hold 2,500 dogs at a time. Moreover,
they are predominantly medical facilities, not long-term _shelters_. There's
also the question of cost - the cost of feeding, vaccines, staffing,
construction and logistics - which the order does not consider. A quick
back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that unless the MCD can somehow
conjure double the space, much more staff, and a steady operating budget of ₹20+
crore _within weeks_, even these initial 5000 dogs will go to the dogs.

I'll hasten to add that all of these numbers are built on sand. Even the figure
of 1 million stray dogs in Delhi NCR is a wild guess. The last census happened
in 2009 which counted approximately half a million strays. That number
supposedly grew to 8 lakhs in 2019, again based only on an estimate. For the 1
million figure, there's no data at all.

Most baffling of all, is the fact that the SC's order mandates an _outcome_, not
a process. Not only does it ignore basic math, it assumes a budget that doesn't
exist - all while not pulling up the governing bodies for not doing their jobs.

---

![](assets/bobo-cookie-2.jpg)

For a decade, Bobo has been a resident stray of my lane. Pretty much everybody
here loves him - which is remarkable in itself. On the other hand, since August
11, some members of the RWA have become somewhat trigger-happy - encouraging
residents and guards to photograph and report stray dogs all over the colony to
the MCD. But O Judgment! Until thou art fled to brutish beasts, and men have
lost their reason, Bobo will stay with Cookie.

I love dogs. I have been bitten by three of them, and I have had the misfortune
of having to [search frantically for rabies vaccines]() - even in a place like
Delhi. So while I admit that I have a personal stake in this matter, it also
bears mention that none of this really has to do with how you feel about dogs.

It's about how the math isn't mathing in the first place. [Piyush Goyal might be
okay with that](https://youtu.be/JkRgynDpxqk) - responsible citizens should not
be.


[^1]: Anyone was huge and monstrous compared to Cookie - the size of your dog
quickly becomes a measure for the size of all dogs. Compared to Cookie, Bruno
(Aditi’s GSD at her parents’ place) is a horse, and a real horse is an elephant.
Aditi has had massive German Shepherds all her life. But after these last few
years with Cookie, even she is surprised at how big they can get. But I think
there's only one unit of measurement that matters, when it comes to dogs - there
are dogs that can be bodily picked up, and those that cannot.

[^2]: I've written only three over the last six months, not counting this one.
It's exceedingly pompous of me to write about this as if it were a battle-tested
process, but I'll allow myself the indulgence.
