# Liberating India's Poor and Unemployed

It's not enough for gig platforms to be profitable. It's not enough that they
sell convenience. They must be proudly defended for their emancipation of the
poor, the uneducated and the unemployed.

---

My dog hates electric scooters. Nothing else can come within inches of her
without making a sound, and that annoys her to no end. Whatever noise it does
make is a high pitched whine like a dog whistle. Every time one gets too close,
she lunges at it snarling and growling. The riders grin stupidly and drive away,
as my dog almost tears my arm off trying to chase them down. I calmly shake my
head at her, telling her that it's her fault. She could have been paying better
attention to the road instead of walking with her nose glued to the ground.

I started driving when my dog was a year old, and some of her contempt for
electric scooters started creeping into me. I came to understand why she hates
them so much. Maybe getting mad at them for quietly invading her space is
perhaps not her fault at all. It's not just the noise - it's the riders too.
Like my dog, even the riders are rarely looking at the road. They're always
looking at their phones, at house numbers, at people standing on the first and
second floor balconies - anywhere but the road. In traffic, they're straight-up
reckless. They accelerate too fast and brake too hard. They sway from side to
side, jump read lights and don't hesitate to drive on the wrong side of the
road. If you indicate you want to turn left or right, they'll end up in your
blind spot with remarkable precision. Every time I yell an obscenity at them
while driving, I can feel my dog rolling her eyes at me. There was a time when
dogs had a peculiar disdain for postmen, now they have it for delivery
~~boys~~[^1] executives.

Strangely, all of that becomes irrelevant when they bring me stuff. It doesn't
matter how many vehicles they've cut off or how many dogs they've annoyed. I'm
never anything but polite to a stranger who brings me food. I make it a point to
address them by name, I thank them and tip them. If it's too hot, I ask them if
they want some water. If it’s raining, I tell them that they're welcome to wait
the bad weather out in my verandah. This irritates my dog even more, she’s the
sovereign of the verandah. Her eyes show a clear sense of betrayal.

The point is that my attitude towards gig workers is a fairly uniform
distribution of emotions - scattered evenly between generosity and irritation.
And I'm sure that's how most people treat them. Most people are... just regular
humans: kind, generous, irritable and angry in equal measure. The polite will
look them in the eye and smile at them. The sociable will strike conversations
with cab drivers in a new city; the tardy will ask them to jump traffic lights.
The indecisive will ask waiters for recommendations and the large-hearted will
tip generously.

But one particular species of humans, the 'influencers', are a different breed
entirely. They can't let so much as a fly buzz past without photographing it and
captioning it on social media with a motivational quote.

![https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7315798287138144257/](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F6004b1e7-ed4d-490e-890d-cdd1c0ae98cb_800x797.jpeg)

Social media has a peculiar relationship with gig workers. On the one hand, it’s
a good place to complain about the workers' unprofessionalism, laziness or
downright criminality. On the other hand, social media virtually worships their
hustle. We all have this fantasy of being a liberated, empowered gig worker -
someone who can decide their own hours and make theoretically infinite money.
For those of us who take our job security, labour rights and social security
benefits for granted - the fantasy is all the more appealing.

But the most interesting reactions towards gig workers are about how they are
emancipated by startups. It's not enough for LinkedIn influencers that
[companies exist for profit](https://youtu.be/BzAdXyPYKQo) - even though,
arguably, that alone is a morally and economically justifiable reason for
startups to exist. Even if startups are successful, their unappointed champions
must find a reason to justify their existence, preferably one that works well
with unnecessary jingoism.

[One such
example](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7280839436785917953/)
came from a gentleman who's very happy that Vijay Shekhar Sharma prefers to use
flamboyant designations like "Indian Digital Services Members" instead of "gig
workers". I wouldn't entirely blame VSS either - whatever image the phrase "gig
worker" invokes in your mind, it's certainly not likely to be dignified. Notice
the hashtags in the post. Words like “#viksitbharat”, “#aadhar”,
“#digitaleconomy”, etc, have been woven into the post with such flourish that it
almost seems like all of India's problems are solved with startups.

However, when you put the chest-thumping aside, the OP does seem to have a good
point. They say that UPI, Aadhar and the India Stack have changed the way we
transact and work. That's true - they have. They say that there are pros and
cons to everything, and that we shouldn't always dwell on the negatives. There
are, and we shouldn't. But for some inexplicable reason, these, apparently, are
things that cannot be said without embellishment. And it's in this tadka of
nationalism that even the most well-meaning people get carried away.

And there, as the Bard says, is the rub.


## The Newer Colossus: India's Platform Economy

> Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
> The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.

(From the sonnet by Emma Lazarus, inscribed on the Statue of Liberty)

The OP mentions that they lived in Dehradun between 2009 and 2015, where they
witnessed "frequent strikes at Gandhi Park... mostly by unemployed youth,
including fresh graduates and dropouts", and that "today such strikes are rare."
Sadly, a quick
[search](https://news.google.com/search?q=dehradun%20gandhi%20park%20protest&hl=en-IN&gl=IN&ceid=IN%3Aen)
on Google News reveals that protests at Gandhi Park are all but rare. And the
most prominent of them in the recent past was indeed held by "unemployed youth"
who were demanding a CBI probe into recruitment scams and action against paper
leaks.

Poor students... if only they'd known that the gig economy has been waiting for
them with open arms! Sure, they'll have to wear [uncomfortable
uniforms](https://www.hindustantimes.com/trending/blinkit-suspends-150-gig-workers-for-demanding-better-pay-drinking-water-report-101745898514841.html)
and deal with the lack of a written contract, job security or other benefits
that come with being "employees", but that's still better than being eyesores in
Gandhi Park. Unemployed youth need to get with the times.

I don't blame the OP for not knowing what's happening in Gandhi Park since 2015
- especially since they moved out of Dehradun, and availability bias is
something that affects the best of us. I wouldn't even blame them for moving out
of Dehradun precisely a year before demonetisation, after which VSS's Paytm
rocketed in popularity, and changed many lives including that of the OP.
Remember how petrol pumps used to discourage the use of mobile phones because
they were thought to be unsafe? But, as soon as the demonetization was
announced, Paytm rendered all petrol pumps in the country safe from mobile
phones overnight. Masterstroke! Changing lives, truly…

The OP's other claims are not so easily falsifiable[^2]. For example, they claim
that "many who once faced barriers like lack of education or technical skills,
now earn ₹15,000 to ₹45,000 or even more." For claims like these, which fall
squarely in the category of _not even wrong_, we can't use anecdotal evidence or
newspaper reports. We need solid primary data. Unfortunately, it's nearly
impossible to get anything very reliable about the gig workforce from existing
surveys. For starters, there is no legal definition of what constitutes gig
work, or that of a gig worker. Sources like the [Periodic Labour Force
Survey](https://mospi.gov.in/download-reports?main_cat=ODU5&cat=All&sub_category=All)
provide proxies based on which individual respondents may be singled out as gig
workers, but that too would be approximate. In fact, until recently there have
been very few enthusiastic moves by the government, corporate lobbyists or even
the civil society to codify the gig workforce within India's labour law.

A bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha in 2020 - [The Code on Social Security,
2020](https://labour.gov.in/sites/default/files/ss_code_as_introduced_in_lok_sabha.pdf)
which has an entire chapter on gig work, which proposed that the central
government shall formulate and notify welfare schemes for gig workers. Labour
experts like [Prof Babu Mathew](https://www.nls.ac.in/faculty/babu-mathew/)
allege, however, that what's crept into the bill is the aggregators' definition
of a gig worker. For instance, the bill states that the aggregator should pay no
more than 5% of the amount payable to a worker towards social security or other
benefits. Prof Mathew calls it a "half-hearted and inadequate attempt".
Rajasthan remains the only state to enact a law that provides for the welfare of
gig workers, but the law is yet to be brought into force. The Telangana and
Karnataka governments appear to be making progressive steps towards this cause
too[^3].

As much as gig workers stand to lose from lobbying, they stand to lose more from
the misclassification of their work. No aggregator wants them as employees. Most
don't even qualify as contractors. It's because of this that we find ourselves
in a strange situation - surveys, policies and studies do include gig workers,
but only in the aggregate. There's virtually no way to filter them out from the
rest of the workforce. For example, the PLFS divides the population into 4
categories - self-employed, regular wage/salaried employees, casual labourers
and finally those that are not a part of the workforce. Where in these
categories do gig workers fit? They could self-report as being self-employed or
even as casual labourers. There are also a lot of people who have full time jobs
but perform gig work for side-income.

All in all, there's no way to disambiguate a gig worker. Until disaggregated
estimates of the gig workforce are not obtained, social media will continue to
adore their hustle and praise platforms for saving them from eternal damnation -
all while remaining oblivious to their reality.

## Estimating India's Gig Workforce

Even if surveys like the PLFS don't give us clear indicators of the gig
workforce, they're still the most comprehensive source we have on the matter.
PLFS employs a rotating sampling panel design which collects data from
individuals and households throughout the year, accounting for seasonality and
bolstered by the very robust methods of the NSS.

![The Indian labour force at a glance. Notice the 2 biggest blocks: rural and
urban women who are not in the workforce make up 30% of the
population.](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Ffb4b0def-ee0c-444e-b440-8ed7883ad119_1519x1012.png)

In addition, there's a 2022 [report from NITI
Aayog](https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2022-06/25th_June_Final_Report_27062022.pdf)
which provides helpful guidelines as to which PLFS respondents are likely to be
gig workers. These guidelines allow us to apply filters of age, education,
occupation, industry to the PLFS data in order to approximate the gig workforce.
For example, gig workers are likely to be largely urban, between 18 to 45 years
old, and come from households that lie under the 75th percentile of monthly
per-capita expenditure (in other words, the poorest three-fourths of the
population). The basic categories of work (self-employed, regular wage/salaried
employees, casual labourers) are still included in this filtered subset of the
data, but we can more easily cross-reference them against education and monthly
income.

![](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fc521dea2-6970-48e0-87ef-9f83bda1f553_1189x665.png)

This view of PLFS (filtered down to the individuals likely to be representative
of the gig workforce) allows us to move the OP's claim about education and
income away from an unfalsifiable claim to something that can be very broadly
verified. And credit where it's due - the OP's estimate of the lower bound of
income (Rs 15,000) does fall comfortably within the range of incomes. The upper
bound of Rs 45,000, however seems quite out of reach. And even those who "faced
barriers like lack of education or technical skills" are not all that worse off,
at least among men. Regardless of education, there doesn't seem to be much
evidence that digital platforms are lifting people out of poverty.

## Trolling as a Public Service

The OP aren't the first person to make tall claims about the gig economy with a
side of jingoism, and they won't be the last. There seems to be a pattern to how
people like these come swarming out of the bushes to defend a misplaced ideal.
That pattern, I can't help but think, is Kunal Kamra.

Kamra [made a documentary](https://youtu.be/2KaihgZrJdw) about the troubles of
gig workers[^4] and released it last August. Then, five months later on New
Years Day, Albinder Dhindsa
[tweeted](https://www.livemint.com/news/india/lipsticks-lemon-grapes-eno-and-more-here-s-what-people-really-ordered-aside-from-food-11735673078740.html)
that lakhs of condoms, thousands of cans of tonic water and hundreds of lighters
were en-route to be delivered in the next ten minutes. Kamra [quoted
him](https://x.com/kunalkamra88/status/1874153974074687617) and asked how much
the delivery partners were making. Dhindsa later deleted his tweet, but his
unappointed champions were still hard at work.

Kamra did it earlier to Bhavish Aggarwal, too. On both occasions, people were
quick to point out that Kamra was just trolling. We're not prepared for a
reality where satire is a better delivery mechanism for news than whatever
abomination passes for mainstream media. A comedian defending workers' rights is
more bizarre to us than a newsperson’s naked and blatant destruction of
journalistic standards. Trolls should have no business doing anything but
trolling (except when the troll is Piyush Goyal - if you’re him, [you can say
what Kamra says](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsPpR1O0-W4&list=LL&index=10)
and get away with it).

Let’s not forget the other kind of troll - the dim-witted, but dangerous
mythical creature. The Witcher video games and books feature some very
entertaining troll encounters. Geralt’s [interactions with
trolls](https://youtu.be/8ag2DuM4o3E) (and other sentient “monsters”) are the
most enjoyable part of the game. Even in the Witcher books, trolls are very
complex creatures. This conversation from [The Last
Wish](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40603587-the-last-wish) shows the role
trolls play in the world of the Witcher:

> …under that bridge sits a troll and demands every passerby pays him. Those who
> refuse have a leg injured, sometimes both. So I go to the alderman: “How much
> will you give me for that troll?” He’s amazed. “What are you talking about?”
> he asks, “Who will repair the bridge if the troll’s not there? He repairs it
> regularly with the sweat of his brow, solid work, first rate. It’s cheaper to
> pay his toll.

---

[^1]: Saying “delivery boys” comes more naturally to someone accustomed to hearing
    phrases like “ladka nikal gaya hai”.
[^2]: Karl Popper would have ignored an unfalsifiable claim entirely, but
    where’s the fun in that!?
[^3]: The Telangana government is currently accepting suggestions on their draft bill
    about registration, social security and welfare of gig workers. The Karnataka
    cabinet has recently approved a similar bill, and is expected to be enacted into
    law.
[^4]: A remarkably restrained, apolitical and uncontroversial documentary, very
    unlike his standup material.
