# Breakable Things

Stuff that breaks is usually a symptom of a larger problem. In software, things
break because of bad design. Programmers either improve the design or they build
around it. Good programmers sometimes embrace the brokenness of things they
can't fix. Instead of covering them, they proudly display the cracks front and
center. They understand that refusing to solve a problem is as much good design
as a solution. This is also why hackers are sometimes valued more than
engineers. They don't fix the underlying problem - they just make things work.
Whatever doesn't work doesn't have to be swept under the rug - it becomes a
signature. A hacker knows what they cannot fix, without guilt.

In life, as in software, things break too. Bodies, minds, relationships and
routines are all so easily breakable that it's a wonder we function at all. And
so we have _life hacks_ - solutions to deeper problems that are almost
necessarily inelegant. It's easy to see why they are appealing. Fundamental
fixes to life's problems are hard - entire religions could thrive for centuries
and not solve them. Life hacks are seductively easier. For the most part, they
are _just enough_.

In the last seven years, I've broken things thrice. Not irreparably so, and
certainly not in a manner that should evoke sympathy - far from it, I'm better
for the breakages. But each time brought about a significant change in how I
look at my health, work, relationships and most of all - my _time_.

Before things broke the first time, life was sorted. There was an easy job, a
commute of predictable duration, and otherwise a fixed routine. The wife was
similarly busy. We would see each other only at dinner and on weekends. Even the
time spent on leisure was fixed - reading on the train, Netflix during dinner
and video games and socializing over the weekends. It had been like that for
three years at that point. It was comfortable. It never occurred to me that it
could be suboptimal. No thoughts of optimization or efficiency crossed my mind.

And then I took a new job. It was a dream job - the kind that you think you'll
spend the rest of your life at. But they only a small team and no office in
Delhi, so I ended up working from home. For the first time in life, I had more
time than I knew what to do with. More time is always a good thing, but only if
you know what to do with it. Initially all the extra time felt like a great
luxury. Like any dutiful knowledge worker, most of it went into doing extra
work. I quickly emerged as the new guy who gives more than 100%. It would take
me a long time to realize that being that guy has diminising marginal utility.
But in the meantime, I had a reputation. Now, I'd always been a workaholic but
upholding my reputation at work meant that I had to squeeze every last droplet
of time and siphon it into work. This, in turn, meant that there was less time
for everything else - especially leisure and relationships. And, naturally, all
concerned parties grew irritable, bitter and unhappy - in that order. This was
classic burnout, but, in my infinite hubris, I refused to admit it even to
myself. Finally, as a self-respecting hacker, instead of solving the root cause
of burnout, I avoided it altogether with hacks - productivity hacks.

So began my long relationship with personal productivity. Back then it wasn't
quite the global enterprise it is today - one that commands a lot of influence.
Sadly the people wielding that influence seem to suffer from the Kardashain
effect - they are productive at creating content about productivity[^1]. My
journal entries from that period (journalling, too, was something that mindful
and productive people recommended - I didn't start enjoying it until much later)
are full of whining about how I couldn't get enough done. Ultimately, many
books, articles, podcasts and videos later, I gave up on productivity hacks[^2].

This was the second time something broke. All hacks broke. Routine broke.
Habits, albeit with a lot of effort, broke. The only "hack" that remained was to
work with depth and focus at a slow and steady pace. It worked well enough for
me to do some of my best work: I went back to school and took some backbreaking
courses. I broke records at work - beat industry benchmarks, designed and built
systems that help millions of people. My wife and I built a forever home and
raised a dog. After all this, there were two things I thought I'd never go back
to - complaining about lack of time and productivity hacks.

And then after six years of working from home, I got a new job. This time at a
company that had an office nearby. My office used to be twenty feet from my
bedroom - now it was a twenty minute drive away. I know, a twenty minute commute
in Delhi is a goddamn luxury compared to what most people have to do. But when
you've been working from home for that long, every step outside is tiring.
Moreover, my new job was with a young company - for most of my colleagues it was
their first job. They were a highly energetic bunch with whom I had to really
work to keep up. It was like starting to go to a gym after a long gap -
exhausting but refreshing. The feeling of intense upheaval lasted about a month;
and was fortunately buffered by the excitement of a new job, new colleagues, new
office, and the sastisfaction of having an entirely new realm of programming
problems to solve. On the other hand, everyone at home - my wife, dog and the
help - had to get accustomed to me not being around. My dog was the worst hit -
in the first few weeks she lost her appetite. She had spent her entire life
lounging in my home office; either under my desk or on the sofa. She doesn't
mind staying there alone, but I could tell that she missed me being in that
room. For my house help, this meant extra hours (and also a raise) to
accommodate my schedule. For my driver, it mean juggling both my and my wife's
commute. My routine seemed like it had broken irreparably once again. Whatever I
had learned from my meanderings in time management and personal productivity
over the last six years seemed to have been overfitted to someone who works from
home. Now I had to rebuild it all over again.

Against this backdrop I saw the famous clip of S. N. Subrahmanyan, the L&T
chairman, wondering how long spouse can stare at each other. He wanted people to
work 90 hours a week. His comments came close on the heels of Narayana Murthy's
recommendation of a 70 hour workweek. These gentlemen are clearly very smart and
very successful. They both come from humble backgrounds. So it stands to reason
that they know what they are talking about. I'm sure that between them, they can
write volumes on productivity hacks.

As for myself, I wonder what I would have to do to work 90 hours a week. Not
starting at one's wife is perhaps, while initially painful, a manageable
productivity hack. But that doesn't me save too much time because my wife
herself is not sitting around waiting to be stared at. And moreover, we are once
again seeing each other only at dinner. Well, I could skip dinner. I could sleep
less. I could walk my dog only once a day. I could drink my morning coffee
during the commute instead of in my living room. I don't need multiple hours for
my hobbies r exercise either. There certainly is a lot of time to be saved, but
I know the cost. I know exactly what I would have to give up in order to work 90
hours a week.

Let's take a look at what other people would have to give up in order to work
that long.


# The Cosmic Ulcer

> ... but how about little faults, little pains, little worries. The cosmic
> ulcer comes not from great concerns but from little irritations. And great
> things can kill a man, but if they do not, he is stronger and better for them.
> Man is destroyed by the duck nibblings of nagging, small bills, telephones,
> athlete's foot, ragweed, common cold, boredom. All of these are the negatives,
> the tiny frustrations and no one is stronger for them.

- John Steinbeck, _The Journal of a Novel: The East of Eden Letters_

I shared this quote with my wife once. She said, "It's almost as if you dictated
this to Steinbeck." It was easily the most flattering thing anyone had ever said
to me. But as I visibly gloated, she added that she didn't mean it as a
compliment.

We had recently had an argument about something... I don't remember exactly what
it was. But it was something to do with home improvement... something like
doorknobs or curtain rods. Whatever it may have been about, at the core of it
was an ideological difference. My wife believes that no matter how small an
inconvenience is, it should be immediately addressed - _immediately_ being the
operative word. On the other hand, I think that most small inconveniences can
wait. In fact, I firmly believe that just because something is doable doesn't
mean it ought to be done. There's an infinite number of doable things. Undoable
things on the other hand are very few. There's nothing inherently special about
most things that are considered doable.

By now, she is bursting at the seams - with just a little amusement and a whole
lot of hopelessness. She reminds me that the whole issue is a lot simpler than
I'm making it - it's all about a few stupid doorknobs. Why can't I just fix them
_today_? I don't know what to say. The answer is actually pretty straightforward
- interruptions have a cost. And for programmers (I work from home),
interruptions are unaffordable. When I can't explain why I don't particularly
care about what I wear or eat - it's the same basic principle. Decisions have
a cost too, no matter how trivial. But there's no way I can say this to
someone, let alone my significant other, without sounding like a pompous,
self-important jerk.

So the path of least resistance is to just fix the doorknobs. But close on the
doorknobs' heels are door stoppers which the dog chewed off, the sofa cushions
with only the smallest visible tears, the printer cartridge refills and the
endless stream of tiny decisions...

Yes, yes... I know it doesn't have to be this bad. There's a ton of
hacks I can throw at this forever advancing avalanche. But that's not the point.
